# qbic-pipelines/variantconsensus: Output

## Introduction

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline. Most of the plots are taken from the MultiQC report, which summarises results at the end of the pipeline.

The directories listed below will be created in the results directory after the pipeline has finished. All paths are relative to the top-level results directory.

## Pipeline overview

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) and processes data using the following steps:

- [bcftools/view](#bcftools-view) - Divide VCFs into SNPs and INDELs
- [bcftools/isec](#bcftools-isec) - Intersect SNPs keeping only variants found in at least (N-1) of the provided VCFs
- [tabix/bgzip](#tabix-bgzip) - Bgzip and index the consensus VCF
- [bcftools/pass](#bcftools-pass) - Filter the consensus VCF for variants marked as 'PASS,.' with `bcftools view`
- [MultiQC](#multiqc) - Aggregate report describing results and QC from the whole pipeline
- [Pipeline information](#pipeline-information) - Report metrics generated during the workflow execution

> [!NOTE]
> INDEL consensus is not yet implemented!

### BCFtools view

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `bcftools/view/{caller}/*.snps.{vcf.gz,vcf.gz.tbi}`: vcf file and its index containing SNPs
- `bcftools/view/{caller}/*.indels.{vcf.gz,vcf.gz.tbi}`: vcf file and its index containing INDELs

</details>

### BCFtools isec

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `bcftools/isec/{patient}_{sample}.snps/`: directory containing the results of the intersection
  - `README.txt`: Info on the isec results decribing all contained files
  - `000x.vcf`: VCF file with the intersected variants
  - `sites.txt`: evaluated sites

</details>

### Tabix BGzip

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `bgzip/{snps,indels}/{patient}_{sample}.{snps,indels}.vcf.gz`: Bgzipped VCF file
- `bgzip/{snps,indels}/{patient}_{sample}.{snps,indels}.vcf.gz.tbi`: Index of bgzipped VCF file

</details>

### BCFtools pass

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `bcftools/pass/{patient}_{sample}.{snps,indels}.consensus.pass.vcf.gz`: VCF file containing only variants marked as PASS or .
- `bcftools/pass/{patient}_{sample}.{snps,indels}.consensus.pass.vcf.gz.tbi`: Index of filtered VCF file

</details>

### MultiQC

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `multiqc/`
  - `multiqc_report.html`: a standalone HTML file that can be viewed in your web browser.
  - `multiqc_data/`: directory containing parsed statistics from the different tools used in the pipeline.
  - `multiqc_plots/`: directory containing static images from the report in various formats.

</details>

[MultiQC](http://multiqc.info) is a visualization tool that generates a single HTML report summarising all samples in your project. Most of the pipeline QC results are visualised in the report and further statistics are available in the report data directory.

Results generated by MultiQC collate pipeline QC from supported tools e.g. FastQC. The pipeline has special steps which also allow the software versions to be reported in the MultiQC output for future traceability. For more information about how to use MultiQC reports, see <http://multiqc.info>.

### Pipeline information

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `pipeline_info/`
  - Reports generated by Nextflow: `execution_report.html`, `execution_timeline.html`, `execution_trace.txt` and `pipeline_dag.dot`/`pipeline_dag.svg`.
  - Reports generated by the pipeline: `pipeline_report.html`, `pipeline_report.txt` and `software_versions.yml`. The `pipeline_report*` files will only be present if the `--email` / `--email_on_fail` parameter's are used when running the pipeline.
  - Reformatted samplesheet files used as input to the pipeline: `samplesheet.valid.csv`.
  - Parameters used by the pipeline run: `params.json`.

</details>

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html) provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to troubleshoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.
